improve words choice for clarity, fix missing '.' in sentences. (#9843)
MicrosoftDocs/sql-docs: docs/relational-databases/collations/collation-and-unicode-support.md

|Option|Description|
|------------|-----------------|

> |Case-sensitive (\_CS)|Distinguishes between uppercase and lowercase letters. If this option is selected, lowercase letters sort ahead of their uppercase versions. If this option is not selected, the collation is case-insensitive. That is, [!INCLUDE[ssNoVersion](../../includes/ssnoversion-md.md)] considers the uppercase and lowercase versions of letters to be identical for sorting purposes. You can explicitly select case insensitivity by specifying \_CI.|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Case-sensitive (\_CS)|Distinguishes between uppercase and lowercase letters. If this option is selected, lowercase letters sort ahead of their uppercase versions. If this option isn't selected, the collation is case-insensitive. That is, [!INCLUDE[ssNoVersion](../../includes/ssnoversion-md.md)] considers the uppercase and lowercase versions of letters to be identical for sorting purposes. You can explicitly select case insensitivity by specifying \_CI.|
```

> |Accent-sensitive (\_AS)|Distinguishes between accented and unaccented characters. For example, "a" is not equal to "ấ". If this option is not selected, the collation is accent-insensitive. That is, [!INCLUDE[ssNoVersion](../../includes/ssnoversion-md.md)] considers the accented and unaccented versions of letters to be identical for sorting purposes. You can explicitly select accent insensitivity by specifying \_AI.| 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Accent-sensitive (\_AS)|Distinguishes between accented and unaccented characters. For example, "a" isn't equal to "ấ". If this option isn't selected, the collation is accent-insensitive. That is, [!INCLUDE[ssNoVersion](../../includes/ssnoversion-md.md)] considers the accented and unaccented versions of letters to be identical for sorting purposes. You can explicitly select accent insensitivity by specifying \_AI.| 
```

> |Kana-sensitive (\_KS)|Distinguishes between the two types of Japanese kana characters: Hiragana and Katakana. If this option is not selected, the collation is kana-insensitive. That is, [!INCLUDE[ssNoVersion](../../includes/ssnoversion-md.md)] considers Hiragana and Katakana characters to be equal for sorting purposes. Omitting this option is the only method of specifying kana-insensitivity.|   

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Kana-sensitive (\_KS)|Distinguishes between the two types of Japanese kana characters: Hiragana and Katakana. If this option isn't selected, the collation is kana-insensitive. That is, [!INCLUDE[ssNoVersion](../../includes/ssnoversion-md.md)] considers Hiragana and Katakana characters to be equal for sorting purposes. Omitting this option is the only method of specifying kana-insensitivity.|   
```

> |Width-sensitive (\_WS)|Distinguishes between full-width and half-width characters. If this option is not selected, [!INCLUDE[ssNoVersion](../../includes/ssnoversion-md.md)] considers the full-width and half-width representation of the same character to be identical for sorting purposes. Omitting this option is the only method of specifying width-insensitivity.|  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Width-sensitive (\_WS)|Distinguishes between full-width and half-width characters. If this option isn't selected, [!INCLUDE[ssNoVersion](../../includes/ssnoversion-md.md)] considers the full-width and half-width representation of the same character to be identical for sorting purposes. Omitting this option is the only method of specifying width-insensitivity.|  
```

> |Variation-selector-sensitive (\_VSS)|Distinguishes between various ideographic variation selectors in the Japanese collations **Japanese_Bushu_Kakusu_140** and **Japanese_XJIS_140**, which are introduced in [!INCLUDE [sssql17-md](../../includes/sssql17-md.md)]. A variation sequence consists of a base character plus a variation selector. If this \_VSS option is not selected, the collation is variation-selector-insensitive, and the variation selector is not considered in the comparison. That is, [!INCLUDE[ssNoVersion](../../includes/ssnoversion-md.md)] considers characters built upon the same base character with differing variation selectors to be identical for sorting purposes. For more information, see [Unicode Ideographic Variation Database](https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr37/).<br/><br/> Variation-selector-sensitive (\_VSS) collations are not supported in full-text search indexes. Full-text search indexes support only Accent-Sensitive (\_AS), Kana-sensitive (\_KS), and Width-sensitive (\_WS) options. [!INCLUDE[ssNoVersion](../../includes/ssnoversion-md.md)] XML and CLR engines don't support (\_VSS) Variation selectors.|      

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Variation-selector-sensitive (\_VSS)|Distinguishes between various ideographic variation selectors in the Japanese collations **Japanese_Bushu_Kakusu_140** and **Japanese_XJIS_140**, which are introduced in [!INCLUDE [sssql17-md](../../includes/sssql17-md.md)]. A variation sequence consists of a base character plus a variation selector. If this \_VSS option isn't selected, the collation is variation-selector-insensitive, and the variation selector isn't considered in the comparison. That is, [!INCLUDE[ssNoVersion](../../includes/ssnoversion-md.md)] considers characters built upon the same base character with differing variation selectors to be identical for sorting purposes. For more information, see [Unicode Ideographic Variation Database](https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr37/).<br/><br/> Variation-selector-sensitive (\_VSS) collations aren't supported in full-text search indexes. Full-text search indexes support only Accent-Sensitive (\_AS), Kana-sensitive (\_KS), and Width-sensitive (\_WS) options. [!INCLUDE[ssNoVersion](../../includes/ssnoversion-md.md)] XML and CLR engines don't support (\_VSS) Variation selectors.|      
```

|Binary (\_BIN)<sup>1</sup>|Sorts and compares data in [!INCLUDE[ssNoVersion](../../includes/ssnoversion-md.md)] tables based on the bit patterns defined for each character. Binary sort order is case-sensitive and accent-sensitive. Binary is also the fastest sorting order. For more information, see the [Binary collations](#Binary-collations) section in this article.|      
|Binary-code point (\_BIN2)<sup>1</sup> | Sorts and compares data in [!INCLUDE[ssNoVersion](../../includes/ssnoversion-md.md)] tables based on Unicode code points for Unicode data. For non-Unicode data, Binary-code point uses comparisons that are identical to those for binary sorts.<br/><br/> The advantage of using a Binary-code point sort order is that no data resorting is required in applications that compare sorted [!INCLUDE[ssNoVersion](../../includes/ssnoversion-md.md)] data. As a result, a Binary-code point sort order provides simpler application development and possible performance increases. For more information, see the [Binary collations](#Binary-collations) section in this article.|

> |UTF-8 (\_UTF8)|Enables UTF-8 encoded data to be stored in [!INCLUDE[ssNoVersion](../../includes/ssnoversion-md.md)]. If this option is not selected, [!INCLUDE[ssNoVersion](../../includes/ssnoversion-md.md)] uses the default non-Unicode encoding format for the applicable data types. For more information, see the [UTF-8 Support](#utf8) section in this article.| 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|UTF-8 (\_UTF8)|Enables UTF-8 encoded data to be stored in [!INCLUDE[ssNoVersion](../../includes/ssnoversion-md.md)]. If this option isn't selected, [!INCLUDE[ssNoVersion](../../includes/ssnoversion-md.md)] uses the default non-Unicode encoding format for the applicable data types. For more information, see the [UTF-8 Support](#utf8) section in this article.| 
```

> <sup>1</sup> If Binary or Binary-code point is selected, the Case-sensitive (\_CS), Accent-sensitive (\_AS), Kana-sensitive (\_KS), and Width-sensitive (\_WS) options are not available.      

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<sup>1</sup> If Binary or Binary-code point is selected, the Case-sensitive (\_CS), Accent-sensitive (\_AS), Kana-sensitive (\_KS), and Width-sensitive (\_WS) options aren't available.      
```

|\_CS_AS_KS_WS<sup>2</sup>|Case-sensitive, accent-sensitive, kana-sensitive, width-sensitive|
|\_CS_AS_WS<sup>2</sup>|Case-sensitive, accent-sensitive, kana-insensitive, width-sensitive|

> <sup>1</sup> If Binary or Binary-code point is selected, the Case-sensitive (\_CS), Accent-sensitive (\_AS), Kana-sensitive (\_KS), and Width-sensitive (\_WS) options are not available.    

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<sup>1</sup> If Binary or Binary-code point is selected, the Case-sensitive (\_CS), Accent-sensitive (\_AS), Kana-sensitive (\_KS), and Width-sensitive (\_WS) options aren't available.    
```

Windows collations define rules for storing character data that's based on an associated Windows system locale. For a Windows collation, you can implement a comparison of non-Unicode data by using the same algorithm as that for Unicode data. The base Windows collation rules specify which alphabet or language is used when dictionary sorting is applied. The rules also specify the code page that's used to store non-Unicode character data. Both Unicode and non-Unicode sorting are compatible with string comparisons in a particular version of Windows. This provides consistency across data types within [!INCLUDE[ssNoVersion](../../includes/ssnoversion-md.md)], and it lets developers sort strings in their applications by using the same rules that are used by [!INCLUDE[ssNoVersion](../../includes/ssnoversion-md.md)]. For more information, see [Windows Collation Name (Transact-SQL)](../../t-sql/statements/windows-collation-name-transact-sql.md).    
    
#### <a id="Binary-collations"></a> Binary collations

> Binary collations sort data based on the sequence of coded values that are defined by the locale and data type. They're case-sensitive. A binary collation in [!INCLUDE[ssNoVersion](../../includes/ssnoversion-md.md)] defines the locale and the ANSI code page that's used. This enforces a binary sort order. Because they're relatively simple, binary collations help improve application performance. For non-Unicode data types, data comparisons are based on the code points that are defined on the ANSI code page. For Unicode data types, data comparisons are based on the Unicode code points. For binary collations on Unicode data types, the locale is not considered in data sorts. For example, **Latin1_General_BIN** and **Japanese_BIN** yield identical sorting results when they're used on Unicode data. For more information, see [Windows Collation Name (Transact-SQL)](../../t-sql/statements/windows-collation-name-transact-sql.md).   

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Binary collations sort data based on the sequence of coded values that are defined by the locale and data type. They're case-sensitive. A binary collation in [!INCLUDE[ssNoVersion](../../includes/ssnoversion-md.md)] defines the locale and the ANSI code page that's used. This enforces a binary sort order. Because they're relatively simple, binary collations help improve application performance. For non-Unicode data types, data comparisons are based on the code points that are defined on the ANSI code page. For Unicode data types, data comparisons are based on the Unicode code points. For binary collations on Unicode data types, the locale isn't considered in data sorts. For example, **Latin1_General_BIN** and **Japanese_BIN** yield identical sorting results when they're used on Unicode data. For more information, see [Windows Collation Name (Transact-SQL)](../../t-sql/statements/windows-collation-name-transact-sql.md).   
```

For more information, see [SQL Server Collation Name (Transact-SQL)](../../t-sql/statements/sql-server-collation-name-transact-sql.md).

> During [!INCLUDE[ssNoVersion](../../includes/ssnoversion-md.md)] setup, the default installation collation setting is determined by the operating system (OS) locale. You can change the server-level collation either during setup or by changing the OS locale before installation. For backward compatibility reasons, the default collation is set to the oldest available version that's associated with each specific locale. Therefore, this is not always the recommended collation. To take full advantage of [!INCLUDE[ssNoVersion](../../includes/ssnoversion-md.md)] features, change the default installation settings to use Windows collations. For example, for the OS locale "English (United States)" (code page 1252), the default collation during setup is **SQL_Latin1_General_CP1_CI_AS**, and it can be changed to its closest Windows collation counterpart, **Latin1_General_100_CI_AS_SC**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During [!INCLUDE[ssNoVersion](../../includes/ssnoversion-md.md)] setup, the default installation collation setting is determined by the operating system (OS) locale. You can change the server-level collation either during setup or by changing the OS locale before installation. For backward compatibility reasons, the default collation is set to the oldest available version that's associated with each specific locale. Therefore, this isn't always the recommended collation. To take full advantage of [!INCLUDE[ssNoVersion](../../includes/ssnoversion-md.md)] features, change the default installation settings to use Windows collations. For example, for the OS locale "English (United States)" (code page 1252), the default collation during setup is **SQL_Latin1_General_CP1_CI_AS**, and it can be changed to its closest Windows collation counterpart, **Latin1_General_100_CI_AS_SC**.
```

Alternatively, starting with [!INCLUDE[sql-server-2019](../../includes/sssql19-md.md)], if a UTF-8 enabled collation (\_UTF8) is used, previously non-Unicode data types (**char** and **varchar**) become Unicode data types using UTF-8 encoding. [!INCLUDE[sql-server-2019](../../includes/sssql19-md.md)] doesn't change the behavior of previously existing Unicode data types (**nchar**, **nvarchar**, and **ntext**), which continue to use UCS-2 or UTF-16 encoding. For more information, see [Storage differences between UTF-8 and UTF-16](#storage_differences).

### Unicode considerations

> Significant limitations are associated with non-Unicode data types. This is because a non-Unicode computer is limited to using a single code page. You might experience performance gain by using Unicode, because it requires fewer code-page conversions. Unicode collations must be selected individually at the database, column, or expression level because they are not supported at the server level.    

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Significant limitations are associated with non-Unicode data types. This is because a non-Unicode computer is limited to using a single code page. You might experience performance gain by using Unicode, because it requires fewer code-page conversions. Unicode collations must be selected individually at the database, column, or expression level because they aren't supported at the server level.    
```

|------------|------------|-----------------------------|    
|Unicode|Unicode|Because Unicode data is used throughout the system, this scenario provides the best performance and protection from corruption of retrieved data. This is the situation with ActiveX Data Objects (ADO), OLE DB, and ODBC version 3.7 or later.|    
|Unicode|Non-Unicode|In this scenario, especially with connections between a server that's running a newer operating system and a client that's running an earlier version of [!INCLUDE[ssNoVersion](../../includes/ssnoversion-md.md)], or on an older operating system, there can be limitations or errors when you move data to a client computer. Unicode data on the server tries to map to a corresponding code page on the non-Unicode client to convert the data.|    

> |Non-Unicode|Unicode|This is not an ideal configuration for using multilingual data. You can't write Unicode data to the non-Unicode server. Problems are likely to occur when data is sent to servers that are outside the server's code page.|    

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Non-Unicode|Unicode|This isn't an ideal configuration for using multilingual data. You can't write Unicode data to the non-Unicode server. Problems are likely to occur when data is sent to servers that are outside the server's code page.|    
```

    
-   Supplementary characters can be used in ordering and comparison operations in collation versions 90 or greater.    
-   All version 100 collations support linguistic sorting with supplementary characters.    

> -   Supplementary characters are not supported for use in metadata, such as in names of database objects.    

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Supplementary characters aren't supported for use in metadata, such as in names of database objects.    
```

|[LEFT](../../t-sql/functions/left-transact-sql.md)<br /><br /> [REPLACE](../../t-sql/functions/replace-transact-sql.md)<br /><br /> [REVERSE](../../t-sql/functions/reverse-transact-sql.md)<br /><br /> [RIGHT](../../t-sql/functions/right-transact-sql.md)<br /><br /> [SUBSTRING](../../t-sql/functions/substring-transact-sql.md)<br /><br /> [STUFF](../../t-sql/functions/stuff-transact-sql.md)|These functions treat each surrogate pair as a single code point and work as expected.|These functions might split any surrogate pairs and lead to unexpected results.|    
|[NCHAR](../../t-sql/functions/nchar-transact-sql.md)|Returns the character that corresponds to the specified Unicode code point value in the range 0–0x10FFFF. If the specified value lies in the range 0–0xFFFF, one character is returned. For higher values, the corresponding surrogate is returned.|A value higher than 0xFFFF returns NULL instead of the corresponding surrogate.|    
|[UNICODE](../../t-sql/functions/unicode-transact-sql.md)|Returns a UTF-16 code point in the range 0–0x10FFFF.|Returns a UCS-2 code point in the range 0–0xFFFF.|    

> |[Match One Character Wildcard](../../t-sql/language-elements/wildcard-match-one-character-transact-sql.md)<br /><br /> [Wildcard - Character(s) Not to Match](../../t-sql/language-elements/wildcard-character-s-not-to-match-transact-sql.md)|Supplementary characters are supported for all wildcard operations.|Supplementary characters are not supported for these wildcard operations. Other wildcard operators are supported.|    

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|[Match One Character Wildcard](../../t-sql/language-elements/wildcard-match-one-character-transact-sql.md)<br /><br /> [Wildcard - Character(s) Not to Match](../../t-sql/language-elements/wildcard-character-s-not-to-match-transact-sql.md)|Supplementary characters are supported for all wildcard operations.|Supplementary characters aren't supported for these wildcard operations. Other wildcard operators are supported.|    
```

-  Above the ASCII range, almost all Latin-based script, and Greek, Cyrillic, Coptic, Armenian, Hebrew, Arabic, Syriac, Tāna, and N'Ko, require 2 bytes per character in both UTF-8 and UTF-16. In these cases, there are no significant storage differences for comparable data types (for example, between using **char** or **nchar**).
-  If it's mostly East Asian script (such as Korean, Chinese, and Japanese), each character requires 3 bytes with UTF-8 and 2 bytes with UTF-16. Using UTF-16 provides storage benefits. 
-  Characters in the range 010000–10FFFF require 4 bytes in both UTF-8 and UTF-16. In these cases, there are no storage differences for comparable data types (for example, between using **char** or **nchar**).

For other considerations, see [Write International Transact-SQL Statements](../../relational-databases/collations/write-international-transact-sql-statements.md).

### <a id="converting"></a> Convert to UTF-8

> Because in [CHAR(*n*) and VARCHAR(*n*)](../../t-sql/data-types/char-and-varchar-transact-sql.md) or in [NCHAR(*n*) and NVARCHAR(*n*)](../../t-sql/data-types/nchar-and-nvarchar-transact-sql.md), the *n* defines the byte storage size, not the number of characters that can be stored, it is important to determine the data type size you must convert to. The characters that exceed the size are to be truncated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because in [CHAR(*n*) and VARCHAR(*n*)](../../t-sql/data-types/char-and-varchar-transact-sql.md) or in [NCHAR(*n*) and NVARCHAR(*n*)](../../t-sql/data-types/nchar-and-nvarchar-transact-sql.md), the *n* defines the byte storage size, not the number of characters that can be stored, it's important to determine the data type size you must convert to. The characters that exceed the size are to be truncated.
```

> For example, consider a column defined as **NVARCHAR(100)** that stores 180 bytes of Japanese characters. In this example, the column data is currently encoded using UCS-2 or UTF-16, which uses 2 bytes per character. Converting the column type to **VARCHAR(200)** is not sufficient to prevent data truncation, because the new data type can only store 200 bytes, but Japanese characters require 3 bytes when encoded in UTF-8. The column must be defined as **VARCHAR(270)** to avoid data loss through data truncation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, consider a column defined as **NVARCHAR(100)** that stores 180 bytes of Japanese characters. In this example, the column data is currently encoded using UCS-2 or UTF-16, which uses 2 bytes per character. Converting the column type to **VARCHAR(200)** isn't sufficient to prevent data truncation, because the new data type can only store 200 bytes, but Japanese characters require 3 bytes when encoded in UTF-8. The column must be defined as **VARCHAR(270)** to avoid data loss through data truncation.
```

> Therefore, it is required to know in advance what is the projected byte size for the column definition before converting existing data to UTF-8, and adjust the new data type size accordingly. Refer to the [!INCLUDE[tsql](../../includes/tsql-md.md)] script or the SQL Notebook in the [Data Samples GitHub](https://github.com/microsoft/sql-server-samples/blob/master/samples/features/unicode), which use the [DATALENGTH](../../t-sql/functions/datalength-transact-sql.md) function and the [COLLATE](../../t-sql/statements/collations.md) statement to determine the appropriate data length requirements for UTF-8 conversion operations in an existing database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, it's required to know in advance what the projected byte size is for the column definition before converting existing data to UTF-8, and adjust the new data type size accordingly. Refer to the [!INCLUDE[tsql](../../includes/tsql-md.md)] script or the SQL Notebook in the [Data Samples GitHub](https://github.com/microsoft/sql-server-samples/blob/master/samples/features/unicode), which use the [DATALENGTH](../../t-sql/functions/datalength-transact-sql.md) function and the [COLLATE](../../t-sql/statements/collations.md) statement to determine the appropriate data length requirements for UTF-8 conversion operations in an existing database.
```
